---
title: "(1) (PDF) Comparing Objective and Subjective Measures of Usability in a Human-Robot Dialogue System"
source: "https://www.researchgate.net/publication/200788274_Comparing_Objective_and_Subjective_Measures_of_Usability_in_a_Human-Robot_Dialogue_System"
author:
published:
created: 2026-06-07
description: "ResearchGate is a network dedicated to science and research. Connect, collaborate and discover scientific publications, jobs and conferences. All for free."
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 879–887,Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c©2009 ACL and AFNLPComparing Objective and Subjective Measures of Usabilityin a Human-Robot Dialogue SystemMary Ellen Foster and Manuel Giuliani and Alois KnollInformatik VI: Robotics and Embedded SystemsTechnische Universit ̈at M ̈unchenBoltzmannstraße 3, 85748 Garching bei M ̈unchen, Germany{foster,giuliani,knoll}@in.tum.deAbstractWe present a human-robot dialogue sys-tem that enables a robot to work togetherwith a human user to build wooden con-struction toys. We then describe a study inwhich na ̈ıve subjects interacted with thissystem under a range of conditions andthen completed a user-satisfaction ques-tionnaire. The results of this study pro-vide a wide range of subjective and ob-jective measures of the quality of the in-teractions. To assess which aspects of theinteraction had the greatest impact on theusers’ opinions of the system, we used amethod based on the PARADISE evalua-tion framework (Walker et al., 1997) to de-rive a performance function from our data.The major contributors to user satisfac-tion were the number of repetition requests(which had a negative effect on satisfac-tion), the dialogue length, and the users’recall of the system instructions (both ofwhich contributed positively).1 IntroductionEvaluating the usability of a spoken language dia-logue system generally requires a large-scale userstudy, which can be a time-consuming processboth for the experimenters and for the experimen-tal subjects. In fact, it can be difficult even todefine what the criteria are for evaluating such asystem (cf. Novick, 1997). In recent years, tech-niques have been introduced that are designed topredict user satisfaction based on more easily mea-sured properties of an interaction such as dialoguelength and speech-recognition error rate. The de-sign of such performance methods for evaluatingdialogue systems is still an area of open research.The PARADISE framework (PARAdigm forDIalogue System Evaluation; Walker et al. (1997))describes a method for using data to derive a per-formance function that predicts user-satisfactionscores from the results on other, more easily com-puted measures. PARADISE uses stepwise mul-tiple linear regression to model user satisfactionbased on measures representing the performancedimensions of task success, dialogue quality, anddialogue efficiency, and has been applied to a widerange of systems (e.g., Walker et al., 2000; Litmanand Pan, 2002; M ̈oller et al., 2008). If the result-ing performance function can be shown to predictuser satisfaction as a function of other, more eas-ily measured system properties, it will be widelyapplicable: in addition to making it possible toevaluate systems based on automatically availabledata from log files without the need for extensiveexperiments with users, for example, such a per-formance function can be used in an online, incre-mental manner to adapt system behaviour to avoidentering a state that is likely to reduce user satis-faction, or can be used as a reward function in areinforcement-learning scenario (Walker, 2000).Automated evaluation metrics that rate sys-tem behaviour based on automatically computableproperties have been developed in a number ofother fields: widely used measures include BLEU(Papineni et al., 2002) for machine translation andROUGE (Lin, 2004) for summarisation, for exam-ple. When employing any such metric, it is cru-cial to verify that the predictions of the automatedevaluation process agree with human judgementsof the important aspects of the system output. Ifnot, the risk arises that the automated measures donot capture the behaviour that is actually relevantfor the human users of a system. For example,Callison-Burch et al. (2006) presented a number of879

counter-examples to the claim that BLEU agreeswith human judgements. Also, Foster (2008) ex-amined a range of automated metrics for evalua-tion generated multimodal output and found thatfew agreed with the preferences expressed by hu-man judges.In this paper, we apply a PARADISE-style pro-cess to the results of a user study of a human-robotdialogue system. We build models to predict theresults on a set of subjective user-satisfaction mea-sures, based on objective measures that were eithergathered automatically from the system logs or de-rived from the video recordings of the interactions.The results indicate that the most significant con-tributors to user satisfaction were the number ofsystem turns in the dialogues, the users’ ability torecall the instructions given by the robot, and thenumber of times that the user had to ask for in-structions to be repeated. The former two mea-sures were positively correlated with user satisfac-tion, while the latter had a negative impact on usersatisfaction; however the correlation in all caseswas relatively low. At the end of the paper, wediscuss possible reasons for these results and pro-pose other measures that might have a larger effecton users’ judgements.2 Task-Based Human-Robot DialogueThis study makes use of the JAST human-robotdialogue system (Rickert et al., 2007) which sup-ports multimodal human-robot collaboration on ajoint construction task. The user and the robotwork together to assemble wooden constructiontoys on a common workspace, coordinating theiractions through speech, gestures, and facial dis-plays. The robot (Figure 1) consists of a pairof manipulator arms with grippers, mounted ina position to resemble human arms, and an an-imatronic talking head (van Breemen, 2005) ca-pable of producing facial expressions, rigid headmotion, and lip-synchronised synthesised speech.The system can interact in English or German.The robot is able to manipulate objects in theworkspace and to perform simple assembly tasks.In the system that was used in the current study,the robot instructs the user on building a partic-ular compound object, explaining the necessaryassembly steps and retrieving pieces as required,with the user performing the actual assembly ac-tions. To make joint action necessary for successin the assembly task, the workspace is divided intoFigure 1: The JAST dialogue robotSYSTEM First we will build a windmill. Okay?USER Okay.SYSTEM To make a windmill, we must make asnowman.SYSTEM \[picking up and holding out red cube\]To make a snowman, insert the green boltthrough the end of this red cube and screwit into the blue cube.USER \[takes cube, performs action\] Okay.SYSTEM \[picking up and holding out a smallslat\] To make a windmill, insert the yellowbolt through the middle of this short slat andthe middle of another short slat and screw itinto the snowman.USER \[takes slat, performs action\] Okay.SYSTEM Very good!Figure 2: Sample human-robot dialogue880